enhancement proposal for Packet IPI (#436)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/installer/packet-ipi.md

workflow.

## Motivation

Users who want to deploy OpenShift on single-tenant cloud infrastructure in
facilities where high levels of interconnection are possible, may wish to take
advantage of Packet's bare metal and virtual networking infrastructure.

We can help these users simplify the process of installing OpenShift on Packet
by introducing an installer-provisioned options that take advantage of various
models of compute, memory, GPU, or storage classes of devices, hardware and IP
reservations, virtual networks, and fast direct-attached storage.

Currently, users who want to [deploy OpenShift on
Packet](https://www.packet.com/solutions/openshift/) must follow the [OpenShift
via Terraform on
Packet][https://github.com/RedHatSI/openshift-packet-deploy/blob/master/terraform/README.md]
UPI instructions. This process is not streamlined and can not be integrated into
a simple experience like the [Try OpenShift 4](https://www.openshift.com/try)
workflow.

### Goals

The main goal of the Packet IPI is to provide users with an easier path to
running Red Hat OpenShift 4 on a horizontally scalable bare metal architecture

> in data centers.

Author: It's worth pointing out that I used the BareMetal UPI enhancement doc as a starting point for this PR.  That legacy is showing through in a few places.

> in data centers.

Reviewer: No worries.  Note there's also `guidelines/enhancement_template.md` that is a helpful reference!

As a first step, we would add the Packet IPI to the installer codebase. With accompanying documentation, this makes a the Packet option available through the CLI. This would enable users to deploy OpenShift with IPI in a way
that is very similar to UPI but simplifies the process.

Following other IPI installers, this first step would include

- Making Packet IPI documentation available here:
  <https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/docs/user/packet/install_ipi.md>
- Adapt Packet's sig-lifecyclce ClusterAPI v1alpha2 for use as an OpenShift's ClusterAPI v1beta1 Machine driver
- Prepare the Terraform code and Packet types necessary for an IPI installer
- Making a CI job executing the provisioning scripts to test the IPI installer

### Non-Goals

It is outside the scope of this enhancement to provide explanations about the
installation of infrastructure elements that are considered as required and

> owned by the user (e.g. DNS, Load Balancer).

Author: Let me know how the latest looks.

> owned by the user (e.g. DNS, Load Balancer).

Reviewer: yes, i like how you moved them to open questions

Additional enhancement requests will be created to determine the best approach for fulfilling each need.

## Proposal

- Define and implement Packet types in the openshift/installer
  - High level variables should include:
    - API Key
    - Project ID
  - Boostrap node variables include:
    - Device plan (defaulting to minimum required)
    - Facility
    - Virtual Networks
  - Control plane variables rely on boostrap variables and add:
    - Device plan (defaulting to provide a good experience)
  - Additional clusters creation should include
    - Device plan (defaulting to provide a good experience)
    - Facility
    - Virtual Networks

>     - Future: IP Reservations, Hardware Reservations, Spot Market Requests

Author: I'm sure we are going to need to revisit this section. I've added more detail in the latest push.

>     - Future: IP Reservations, Hardware Reservations, Spot Market Requests

Reviewer: OK, I think this is fine in the provisional state of the enhancement

- Write documentation to help users use and understand the Packet installer, to include:
  - Packet usage basics (accounts and API keys)
  - Packet resource requirements and options
  - OpenShift Installer options
  - Non-Packet components that build on the experience (DNS configuration)
- Setup the CI job to have a running test suite

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

- RHCOS must be made available and maintained.

>   Images available for provisioning may be custom or official.

Reviewer 2: Packet's official image and custom image mechanisms are both based on filesystem tarballs rather than disk images, and RHCOS is delivered as a disk image.

If we want to get an official RHCOS image into Packet, we should work with the Packet folks to set up a custom deployment flow using [coreos-installer](https://github.com/coreos/coreos-installer/).  CoreOS Container Linux used a similar arrangement.

Otherwise, we can use Packet's custom iPXE support to implement the same thing ourselves.  We'd just boot the RHCOS live PXE image and perform an ordinary bare-metal install, telling the installer to override the platform ID to `packet`.

Author: I've captured most of this in the latest push. Thanks for the input and context, @bgilbert!

  Official images can be hosted outside of Packet, such as ContainerLinux and RancherOS. More details area available here: <https://github.com/packethost/packet-images>
  Custom Images can be hosted on git, as described here:
  - <https://www.packet.com/developers/docs/servers/operating-systems/custom-images/>
  - <https://www.packet.com/developers/changelog/custom-image-handling/>
- Packet does not offer a managed DNS solution. Route53, CloudFlare, or RFC 2136
  (DNS Update), and NS record based zone forwarding are considerations. Existing

>   IPI drivers like BareMetal have similar limitations.

Reviewer: For `baremetal` IPI, we do some automation of required DNS records for use within the cluster itself.  I think that should be reusable here if multicast is allowed on packet's network.  Has this been considered?

Author: Multicast is not fully supported, it may work enough for our needs.  Are you suggesting mDNS?

Reviewer: Yeah.  Take a look at the "internal DNS" section of https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/network/baremetal-networking.md

Reviewer 3: mdns is used internally for IPI. Both for nodes resolution and for pointing to the api-int entry.
It has nothing to do with external consumption.

In assisted-installer (where we also rely on BM IPI ignitions) we do provide optional route53 based dns to support external api + *.apps resolution.

Author: Interesting. I've been looking for something like https://github.com/openshift/mdns-publisher

(for https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/external-dns/issues/1604)

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/master/templates/common/baremetal/files/baremetal-mdns-publisher.yaml

This is the relevant repo that provides networking related manifests as part of IPI BareMetal platfrom - you'll find there mdns, keepalived and coredns.

- LoadBalancing can be achieved with the Packet CCM, which creates and maintains

>   a MetalLB deployment within the cluster.

Reviewer: An important note is that MetalLB is not yet supported by OpenShift.  You can link to https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/356

Author: I'm not sure if that limitation would hinder this enhancement.  Once the Packet CCM (an external ccm) becomes an option, the Packet CCM will maintain a MetalLB deployment itself.

Reviewer: Who supports MetalLB itself?  If this platform is to be treated like all other platforms, every required component is something shipped and support by Red Hat.  If we intend for any of the components to be treated as third-party add-ons not supported by Red Hat, we can call that out and discuss how it would work.  This may be something we need to discuss further out-of-band.

Author: The packet-ccm manages the manifests (deployment, namespace, rbac, policies, etc) of MetalLB. 

Is that problematic?

https://github.com/packethost/packet-ccm/blob/cd31ff67acaac2c8cb3a7c0a48d8abbf923c6ec2/main.go#L52

Author: https://github.com/plunder-app/kube-vip/pull/56 may be an alternative LoadBalancer solution, and the packet-ccm's MetalLB approach to LoadBalancing could be disabled.

> - Both Public and Private IPv4 and IPv6 addresses made available for each node.

Reviewer: We should discuss how network configuration is to be handled.  IIRC, the IPv4 address is handed out via DHCP, so that should work fine without any further changes.  There is no DHCPv6 for IPv6, so OpenShift configured for IPv6 will not work without some additional changes.  I believe we need the hosts to pull their networking config from a packet API so they can self-configure the IPv6 address?

Author: Packet devices do not use DHCP.  Device addresses are configured on the filesystem early in the boot phase.
We can look at how this is implemented to some degree with the opensource Tinkerbell project:

- https://github.com/tinkerbell/osie/blob/master/ci/network-test-files/want/centos-x1.small.x86-supermicro/etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/ifcfg-bond0https://github.com/tinkerbell/osie/blob/96d01cf72d64dc0b0d32e74631a467af64d4c4ad/docker/scripts/osie.sh#L551
- https://github.com/packethost/packet-networking/tree/master/packetnetworking/distros/redhat
- https://github.com/packethost/packet-images
  (The images are based on and distributed as Docker images. A different approach is taken for images that require raw partitiion/filesystem layouts, as RHCOS does.  This will require some RedHat <-> Packet coordination.)

All of this is to say, that the Packet approach to providing images and preparing those images on boot-up could be explored.

>  believe we need the hosts to pull their networking config from a packet API so they can self-configure the IPv6 address?

There is also a metadata service available.  https://www.packet.com/developers/docs/servers/key-features/metadata/
OSIE configures Cloudinit to use EC2 Data sources with the metadata.packet.net/metadata URL.  Would it benefit this effort to seek Packet addition to https://github.com/canonical/cloud-init/tree/master/cloudinit/sources, or is there a different project where this would need to be added (Ignition)?

It may also be possible to boot a raw unmodified RHCOS image, but I'm not sure about the process.  If this direction were pursued, I assume we would need a Packet presence in the version of CloudInit/Ignition shipped by RHCOS.

Reviewer: Thanks for the clarifications!

cloud-init is not used here.  Ignition is used, instead.

I do think we should aim for booting an unmodified RHCOS image and allowing it to get initialized at boot time.  By default we'll be assuming DHCP is available.  If not, it does sound like we'll need to provide some additional ignition configuration to configure networking on first boot.

You may find this enhancement interesting, which describes the levers we have available for configuring networking on the host: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/394

At some point I'd like to see a section in this document that describes how we'll handle host network configuration for this platform.  While the enhancement is `provisional`, it can be captured as an open question while we work through the details.

Reviewer: actually, how does host network configuration work for the UPI installation method already implemented?

Author: A bastion node is created to serve the RHCOS image and act as a DHCP server for other nodes that will be added.

The control plane nodes added after the bastion node get [DHCP/ipxe instructions from the bastion node](https://github.com/RedHatSI/openshift-packet-deploy/blob/master/terraform/modules/bastion/templates/ipxe.tpl#L6-L7).  Their DHCP boot info includes ipxe instructions to boot from the bastion node's hosted copy of the RHCOS image.  

That RHCOS image is pulled at provision time from a static address:
* https://github.com/RedHatSI/openshift-packet-deploy/blob/b8ea976cd83cb850b8732fdabeeb42ba85020bf3/terraform/modules/bastion/main.tf#L53-L59
* https://github.com/RedHatSI/openshift-packet-deploy/blob/b8ea976cd83cb850b8732fdabeeb42ba85020bf3/terraform/modules/bastion/main.tf#L91-L111.

Reviewer 2: In the old CoreOS Container Linux images for Packet, Afterburn (then called coreos-metadata) ran in the initramfs, queried the Packet metadata service for IPv6 and private IPv4 addresses and NIC bonding configuration, and wrote out configuration files for networkd.  That code still exists in RHCOS but would need to be updated for NetworkManager: https://github.com/coreos/fedora-coreos-tracker/issues/111

Author: I've been experimenting with RHCOS boots via IPXE URL: https://gist.github.com/displague/5282172449a83c7b83821f8f8333a072

In my latest efforts, the serial console (SOS) doesn't appear to come up after reboot.

Reviewer 4: Yeah, kernel args aren't persisted. I think there's a recent feature to be able to persist them. @yuqi-zhang may know.

Reviewer 2: There is, but it's not exposed on the kernel command line, so you'd have to [override the install unit](https://github.com/coreos/coreos-installer/blob/master/doc/customizing-install.md#custom-coreos-installer-invocation).  I suspect the RHCOS GRUB config should be changed to automatically configure the correct serial console on Packet.

Reviewer 5: I don't think `persistent-kargs` is a flag: https://github.com/coreos/coreos-installer#kernel-command-line-options-for-coreos-installer-running-as-a-service

I think kargs have been persisted by default since 4.2? but it's been awhile since I've checked, so I'd defer to Benjamin's more recent knowledge on how to use this

Reviewer 2: Certain kargs are automatically whitelisted.  `console` isn't one of them, so you'd need to use `--append-karg`.

Author: @bgilbert is `append-karg` available in the kernel command line?

In this openshift-installer I think it is fair to have a very opinionated (generated) Ignition file.

For my local testing, and in the general use-cases of launching RHCOS (and related OSes), it would be very helpful (a requirement?) to not need to merge values into the data stashed at the Ignition URL.  I suspect the format of this content could be unpredictable (json vs yaml, other?) (I'm also thinking of cloud-init, where the value could be a shell script or a cloud-config, a gzipped multi-part mime document, or other).

Reviewer 2: > is append-karg available in the kernel command line?

Nope.

On 4.6, with Ignition spec 3, you might take a look at [FCCT](https://github.com/coreos/fcct/), particularly [`storage.trees`](https://github.com/coreos/fcct/blob/master/docs/configuration-v1_1.md).  You can create an FCC that points to a local directory tree, then run FCCT against it to produce an Ignition config which embeds 1) the contents of that tree, and 2) the Ignition config generated by openshift-installer.

Reviewer 6: @bgilbert is FCCT the preferred (or only) method to append kargs? [MachineConfigs](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/docs/user/customization.md#nodes-with-custom-kernel-arguments) looked like a possible alternative, but I wasn't certain if the kargs whitelist applies here.

Reviewer 2: @liveaverage FCCT can't append kargs right now; that paragraph was replying to the last paragraph of https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/436#discussion_r477349794.  The mechanism you linked is separate from the coreos-installer one, and the whitelist doesn't apply there.  AIUI the MachineConfig karg mechanism doesn't apply to the very first boot.

  Private and VLAN Networks can be restricted at the project level (default) or
  node by node. While custom ASNs and BGP routing features are supported, these
  and other networking features will not be exposed through the IPI.
  <https://www.packet.com/cloud/network/>

> - Openshift with run directly on RHCOS directly on baremetal without need for a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- OpenShift with run on RHCOS directly on bare metal without need for a
```

  VM layer.

### Risks and Mitigations

> The official Packet ClusterAPI, CCM, and CSI drivers are all relatively new and

Reviewer: Links to each of these components would be helpful.

It would also be nice to expand on the integration plans for each of these items.

ClusterAPI -- This is alluded to in the task list earlier in the doc, but I expect we'd have to fork the CAPI repo into OpenShift and then adapt it to the OpenShift machine API.  Changes will be needed to the openshift/machine-api-operator to understand how to run this new machine controller.

CCM -- This is going to hit a limitation we have in OpenShift.  We don't yet have integration for running the external cloud controller managers.  This enhancement is related: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/423/  That enhancement discusses using the out-of-tree OpenStack CCM.  As a prerequisite, we need a new operator to manage it.  That operator can be re-used for other out-of-tree CCMs, including this one.

CSI -- I don't know how CSI drivers are integrated.  Has this been investigated yet?  Are there notes we can include on the integration process and any expected challenges?

Author: > Links to each of these components would be helpful.

* https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-packet
* https://github.com/packethost/packet-ccm
* https://github.com/packethost/csi-packet

> It would also be nice to expand on the integration plans for each of these items.

Will do. I'm not sure how far out we'll need to plan for these integrations. I suspect, based on your earlier comments, that I may need another enhancement request for each of the components unless we can take advantage of existing features (especially for the CSI and CCM).

> I expect we'd have to fork the CAPI repo into OpenShift and then adapt it to the OpenShift machine API. 

That sounds reasonable. We could try to host it at the existing repository, but a `v1beta1` tag will conflict with an eventual kubernetes-sigs spec and the likely capi-packet release tag.

This is the v1alpha1 based MachineProvider spec: 
https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-packet/blob/v0.1.0/pkg/apis/packetprovider/v1alpha1/packetmachineproviderspec_types.go

I imagine the OpenShift v1beta1 capi-packet will build on this, the existing v1alpha3 enhancements, and changes necessary to adopt O/S capi v1beta1.

> Changes will be needed to the openshift/machine-api-operator to understand how to run this new machine controller.

I started a branch for this, https://github.com/openshift/machine-api-operator/compare/master...displague:packet?expand=1. We'll need some coordination to get those quay image tags into existence.

>  We don't yet have integration for running the external cloud controller managers.

The value of the Packet CCM is in tracking the Packet device ids so the state of k8s nodes can reflect the state of Packet devices (deleted device is a removed node, for example). The other value is in configuring the MetalLB based loadbalancer.  If there an alternative (in-tree) baremetal CCM available that could provide LoadBalancer service with the limitations that come from not being Packet API aware?

> I don't know how CSI drivers are integrated. Has this been investigated yet?

Is that to say only flex volumes are supported?
What Openshift Baremetal storage solutions are available that don't rely on cloud managed storage?

Reviewer: There is no other bare-metal CCM.  

I'm OK if this enhancement doesn't answer all of the integration questions around these components, but I'd like them to be captured as open questions either to be addressed by follow-up PRs to this doc, or future separate enhancements if the topic is deep enough to deserve its own doc.

## Design Details

### Test Plan

We will use existing UPI platforms, such as OpenStack, AWS, and GCP, as the
inspiration for our testing strategy:

- A new e2e job will be created
- At the moment, we think unit tests will probably not be necessary. However, we
  will cover any required changes to the existing codebase with appropriate
  tests.

### Graduation Criteria

The proposal is to follow a graduation process based on the existence of a CI
running suite with end-to-end jobs. We will evaluate its feedback along with
feedback from QE's and testers.

We consider the following as part of the necessary steps:

- CI jobs present and regularly scheduled.
- IPI document published in the OpenShift repo.
- End to end jobs are stable and passing and evaluated with the same criteria as
  comparable IPI providers.
- Developers of the team have successfully used the IPI to deploy on Packet
  following the documented procedure.

## Implementation History

Significant milestones in the life cycle of a proposal should be tracked in
`Implementation History`.

## Drawbacks

> The IPI implementation is provisioned on baremetal which faces resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The IPI implementation is provisioned on bare metal which faces resource
```

I imagine the Packet team may have strong opinions on this matter, ha!  This is a total nit, but we have a "bare metal" style guide that we follow here: https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-docs/blob/master/design/bare-metal-style-guide.md

Author: Packet's standard agrees. I have to get it into my head. 🤕 🔨

availability limitations beyond those in VM environment. CI, QE, documentation,
and tests will need to be generous when defining provisioning times. Tests and
documentation should also be made flexible about facilities and device model
choices to avoid physical limitations.

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 3: Do we want to list  assisted-installer (AI) as another alternative here:
https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/installer/connected-assisted-installer.md

Reviewer: as an alternative for doing installs on packet instead of a full IPI implementation, you mean?

Reviewer: We could add to the open questions list something like "are any aspects of the assisted installer flow for bare metal clusters reusable and helpful for the Packet IPI install flow?"

I don't know the answer yet, but that would make sure we don't lose the question

People not using the IPI workflow can follow the [Packet
UPI](https://github.com/RedHatSI/openshift-packet-deploy/blob/master/terraform/README.md)
document. This requires more manual work and the necessary knowledge to identify
Packet specific parts without any automation help.

Users may also follow along with the [Deploying OpenShift 4.4 on
Packet](https://www.openshift.com/blog/deploying-openshift-4.4-on-packet) blog
post, but there is no automation provided.

ProjectID is being defined as a high level variable. Arguably, OrganizationID
could take this position, as this represents the billing account. OrganizationID
is inferred by ProjectID in the current proposal. In a variation where
Organization is required at install, ProjectID could become a required or
optional (inherited) property for each cluster. Keep in mind, Projects are one
way to share a private network between nodes.

## Infrastructure Needed

> As has been demonstrated in the Packet UPI, users will need access to a Packet Project, API Key, and no less than 4 servers. One of these will be used for bootstrapping while the other 3 represent the control plane. The fourth node, used for bootstrapping can be removed once the cluster is installed.

Reviewer: It should be possible to deploy only 3 servers.

https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.5/installing/installing_bare_metal/installing-bare-metal.html#installation-three-node-cluster_installing-bare-metal

- Making a CI job executing the provisioning scripts to test the IPI installer

### Non-Goals

It is outside the scope of this enhancement to provide details about the
installation and infrastructure elements that have been highlighted in [Open
Questions](#open-questions) and [Implementation
Details/Notes/Constraints](#implementation-details-notes-constraints), even for
those elements that are required (e.g. DNS).

When open questions are explored and resolved, they will be added to this
enhancement request or they will be surfaced in additional enhancement requests,
as needed.

## Proposal

- Define and implement Packet types in the openshift/installer
  - High level variables should include:
    - [API Key](https://www.packet.com/developers/docs/API/) (required)
    - [Project
      ID](https://www.packet.com/developers/docs/getting-started/support/organizations-and-users/)
      (required) (Options to create a project could be presented)
  - Boostrap node variables include:
    - Device plan (required, defaulting to minimum required)
    - Facility (required)
    - Virtual Network (optional, defaulted to a new virtual network)

>   - Control plane variables rely on boostrap variables and add:

Reviewer: Does "rely on bootstrap variables" mean that it will inherit the same settings, enforcing common settings for the whole cluster?  Or is this a shorthand way of saying "all of that stuff plus some more" ?

Author: I was thinking inheritance but I left my wording open in case that is not an option or not the best choice.

    - Device plan (defaulting to provide a good experience)

>   - Additional clusters created through the ClusterAPI will require fields

Reviewer: OpenShift does not support creating clusters through ClusterAPI.  It only uses a subset (Machine, MachineSet) to abstract machine provisioning within a cluster, typically to scale out and add worker nodes.

- Both Public and Private IPv4 and IPv6 addresses made available for each node.
  Private and VLAN Networks can be restricted at the project level (default) or
  node by node. While custom ASNs and BGP routing features are supported, these
  and other networking features will not be exposed through the IPI.
  <https://www.packet.com/cloud/network/>
- Openshift will run on RHCOS directly on bare metal without the need for a
  VM layer.

### Risks and Mitigations

The [official Packet
ClusterAPI](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-packet),
[CCM](https://github.com/packethost/packet-ccm), and
[CSI](https://github.com/packethost/csi-packet) drivers are all relatively new
and may make undertake substantial design changes.  This project will either
need to adopt and maintain the current releases, or adopt newer releases
developed alongside this project.

The CI will need to assure that Packet resources are cleanly released after
failed and successful builds.  Packet is currently used in the bare metal
provisioning tests, so there is some prior art available.  If the same account
is used for testing the IPI, it may need account quota increases.

> ## Design Details

Reviewer: We've had a few exchanges about load balancing.  We can get something going without Service of type=LoadBalancer supported yet.  We can *not* get a working install without some load balancing of the API and Ingress.  I would make 1 of 2 possible updates:

1. Update this as an open question, since we must solve it before you can get a successful install.

2. Document in the implementation details that this is left as an external requirement.  Administrators must manually set up and configure an external load balancer or they must manually update their DNS for the cluster to achieve the same goal.  We can refer to the UPI instructions on this.

Author: Added as an open question in the latest push. Thanks for pointing these gaps out, @russellb!

### Open Questions

> - Is the Packet CCM necessary?

Reviewer: Does it provide features beyond deploying and configuring MetalLB?

Author: I've added a better description here.

  - If so, who is responsible for supporting the MetalLB installation the Packet

>     CCM provides and requires for LoadBalancer definitions?

Reviewer: I think it's fair to say that the use of MetalLB with OpenShift on Packet would follow whatever more general MetalLB deployment management we come up with.  See #356 or any follow-ups to that same enhancement.

What may still make sense is Packet specific code to automatically configure it with the BGP settings that are appropriate for Packet.  Automating that would be a cool feature in Packet IPI support, but is blocked on having MetalLB supported in the first place.

  - Can [https://github.com/plunder-app/kube-vip#56](plunder-app/kube-vip)
    stand-in for LoadBalancer service on Packet while disabling the packet-ccm's

>     MetalLB approach to LoadBalancing?

Reviewer: I don't see kube-vip and MetalLB as doing quite the same thing, since MetalLB handles Services of type=LoadBalancer, and kube-vip is focused on being the load balancer for the control plane.  Right now I do not think it's likely we would adopt kube-vip.  What is more likely is evolving OpenShift to where we can use LoadBalancer Services for our control plane.  See #459 for the latest discussion on this topic.  You may want to link that enhancement here for reference.,

Author: https://kube-vip.io/
> A Load-Balancer for both inside and outside a Kubernetes cluster
> `type: LoadBalancer`

I'm adding a note about #459.

Questions](#open-questions) and [Implementation
Details/Notes/Constraints](#implementation-details-notes-constraints), even for
those elements that are required (e.g. DNS).

When open questions are explored and resolved, they will be added to this
enhancement request or they will be surfaced in additional enhancement requests,
as needed.

## Proposal

- Define and implement Packet types in the openshift/installer
  - High level variables should include:
    - [API Key](https://www.packet.com/developers/docs/API/) (required)
    - [Project
      ID](https://www.packet.com/developers/docs/getting-started/support/organizations-and-users/)
      (required) (Options to create a project could be presented)
  - Boostrap node variables include:
    - Device plan (required, defaulting to minimum required)
    - Facility (required)
    - Virtual Network (optional, defaulted to a new virtual network)
  - Control plane variables rely on boostrap variables and add:
    - Device plan (defaulting to provide a good experience)
  - Additional clusters created through the Machine/MachineSet will require
    fields commensurate with the sig-cluster-lifecycle Packet Cluster API

>     Provider specifications

Reviewer 7: `clusters` probably isn't the right word here, OCP doesn't create clusters, do you mean additional virtual machines or something?

Author: I meant `additional bare metal machines`. My point is that the fields that we use to define the machine spec will map closely (but independently) from the fields presented in the existing v1alpha3 Cluster API provider.

I'll reword as such.

  - Will DNS round-robin suffice?
  - Can Kube-vip be used for this purpose?
  - Can the API be loadbalanced by the service Loadbalancer?
    [openshift/enhancements#459](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/459)
- Is the Packet CCM necessary?
  - One of the Packet CCM functions is to provider LoadBalancer support through a (CCM) managed deployment of MetalLB. Enabling LB support is optional.
    - If enabled, who is responsible for supporting the MetalLB installation?
    - If not enabled, how do we take advantage of [Service Load Balancers for On
      Premise
      Infrastructure](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/356) for
      use with Packet (and Packet BGP features)?
  - Can [https://github.com/plunder-app/kube-vip#56](plunder-app/kube-vip)
    stand-in for LoadBalancer service on Packet while disabling the packet-ccm's
    MetalLB approach to LoadBalancing?
  - Aside from loadbalancing, are other CCM responsibilities critical? These
    include Kubernetes node annotations and Packet API hints that a "device"
    (and therefor node) has been deleted.
- Is the Packet CSI necessary? If not, how will the Openshift image registry be
  created.

> - Can the sig-cluster-lifecycle ClusterAPI and OpenShift MachineAPI converge to

Reviewer 7: I don't think this is likely to happen any time soon. The models are very very different at this point sadly. I would expect we can reuse a lot of the upstream provider pretty verbatim but the source of configuration will have to remain embedded in the Machine for the foreseeable future which will be the major difference between the two

Author: @JoelSpeed Do you think I should drop the question or leave it as an open area of concern or interest?

Reviewer 7: Might be worth including my comments as a reply? That or drop it, either way works for me

Author: Added.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

- RHCOS must be made available and maintained.

  Images available for provisioning may be custom or official. Official images
  can be hosted outside of Packet, such as ContainerLinux and RancherOS. More
  details area available here: <https://github.com/packethost/packet-images>
  Custom Images can be hosted on git, as described here:
  - <https://www.packet.com/developers/docs/servers/operating-systems/custom-images/>
  - <https://www.packet.com/developers/changelog/custom-image-handling/>

> - It may be possible to boot using the [Packet Custom iPXE

Author: https://github.com/coreos/mantle#kola - very interesting

> - It may be possible to boot using the [Packet Custom iPXE

Reviewer 2: That's the old Container Linux one.  https://github.com/coreos/coreos-assembler/tree/master/mantle#kola now.

  configuration](https://www.packet.com/developers/docs/servers/operating-systems/custom-ipxe/).

  As described at <https://ipxe.org/howto/rh_san>, it may be possible to use the
  [recommended RHCOS bare metal
  images](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.5/installing/installing_bare_metal/installing-bare-metal.html#registry-configuring-storage-baremetal_installing-bare-metal)
  ([mirror](https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/dependencies/rhcos/4.5/?extIdCarryOver=true&sc_cid=701f2000001OH7iAAG)).

  A generic RHCOS Ignition URL could instruct nodes booted on Packet to

>   configure their network using the EC2-like [metadata

Reviewer 2: Ignition wouldn't be involved in that process.  Afterburn would automatically run in the initramfs (`ConditionKernelCommandLine=ignition.platform.id=packet`) and configure the network.

Author: @liveaverage points out that I should include a note about the size constraints of userdata over Packet metadata.  I'll dig up the limit.

Can Ignition work with base64 encoded, gzipped, multipart mime (like cloud-init can)?

Reviewer 2: No, the userdata has to be an Ignition config without any special encoding.  However, Ignition configs have a mechanism (`ignition.config.merge`) for merging an external Ignition config into the one fetched from metadata.  If necessary, the one in userdata can bootstrap the real config.

adopt and maintain the current releases, or adopt newer releases developed
alongside this project.

The CI will need to assure that Packet resources are cleanly released after
failed and successful builds.  Packet is currently used in the bare metal
provisioning tests, so there is some prior art available.  If the same account
is used for testing the IPI, it may need account quota increases.

## Design Details

### Open Questions

- Is the Packet CCM necessary?
- Is the Packet CSI necessary? If not, how will the Openshift image registry be
  created.
- Can the sig-cluster-lifecycle ClusterAPI and OpenShift MachineAPI converge to
  prevent maintaining two similar but different ClusterAPI implementations?
- How will the RHCOS image be served?

> - How will Ignition be started and configure nodes appropriately? (restating - DHCP is not available but a metadata service is)

Reviewer 2: There's no bootstrapping problem here.  The system comes up, DHCPs for its public IPv4 address, Afterburn configures other addresses by querying the metadata service, then Ignition runs.
